feat(installation): update t2 macbook guide (#129)
CachyOS/wiki: src/content/docs/installation/installation_t2macbook.mdx

CachyOS provides out-of-the-box support for T2 MacBooks, including necessary kernel patches in all provided kernels. However, there are crucial steps required before, during, and after installation for a successful setup, especially regarding Wi-Fi.

:::caution[Potential Risks]
Completely removing macOS carries risks, like data loss or rendering the device unusable. It's **strongly recommended** to keep a macOS partition for firmware updates and recovery. Refer to the [T2 Linux Roadmap](https://wiki.t2linux.org/roadmap/#can-i-completely-remove-macos) for details.

If you still decide to remove macOS, ensure you have a full backup and create a [bootable macOS installer](https://support.apple.com/en-us/101578) beforehand.
:::

:::note[Wi-Fi Firmware Required]
Wi-Fi **will not work** out of the box during or after installation because the required firmware is proprietary and cannot be redistributed by CachyOS. You will need an internet connection (e.g., Ethernet, USB tethering) for the installation process unless you follow the steps below to prepare the Wi-Fi firmware beforehand and enable it during installation.
:::

## Creating a macOS Recovery Installer

> It is highly recommended to create a bootable macOS installer **before** you modify your partitions or install CachyOS, especially if you are considering removing macOS entirely. This USB installer allows you to reinstall macOS for firmware updates, troubleshooting, or restoring your system if needed.

Reviewer: This section looks like a compulsory step rather than a recommendation. Can we format it in such a way that it is separate from the main steps? 

A better way imo will be to just link Apple's guide here and remove the steps for bootable macOS usb.

<Steps>
1.  **Obtain a USB Drive:** You'll need an external USB drive (at least 16GB, ideally 32GB).
2.  **Follow Apple's Guide:** Apple provides detailed instructions on how to download a macOS installer and create a bootable USB drive from it.
    *   **Follow the official guide here:** [How to create a bootable installer for macOS - Apple Support](https://support.apple.com/en-us/101578)
3.  **Store Safely:** Keep this USB drive in a safe place in case you need to restore macOS later.
</Steps>

## Pre-Installation

> Perform these steps within macOS **before** booting the CachyOS installer. Ensure you have created your [macOS Recovery Installer](#creating-a-macos-recovery-installer) if desired.

Reviewer: No need to ensure macOS recovery installer. It's practically not feasible by many.

<Steps>

1.  **Prepare Your Disk:**
    *   If you plan to dual-boot (recommended), use macOS Disk Utility to resize your existing macOS partition and create free space for CachyOS.

>         * Refer to the [t2linux Partition with Disk Utility guide](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/preinstall/#partition-with-disk-utility) for detailed instructions.

Reviewer: If you are doing a overhaul, the partition steps should be in this guide rather than putting a link

2.  **Disable Secure Boot:**
    *   Reboot your Mac and hold `Command (⌘) + R` immediately after powering on to enter Recovery Mode.
    *   Go to Utilities > Startup Security Utility.

>     *   Select "No Security" under Secure Boot and "Allow booting from external or removable media" under External Boot.

Reviewer: Select "No Security" under **Secure Boot** and "Allow booting from external or removable media" under **Allowed Boot Media**

I'd prefer the headings as bold like this.

3.  **(Optional) Extract Wi-Fi Firmware:**
    *   While still in macOS, open Terminal and run the following command. This copies the necessary Wi-Fi firmware files to your EFI partition, making them accessible later during the CachyOS installation.
        ```sh
        curl -sL https://wiki.t2linux.org/tools/firmware.sh | bash -s copy_to_efi
        ```
4.  **Prepare CachyOS Bootable USB:**
    *   Download the CachyOS ISO.
    *   Follow the instructions in [Creating a Bootable CachyOS USB Drive](/installation/installation_prepare#creating-a-bootable-cachyos-usb-drive) to create the installation media.

</Steps>

For a more detailed overview of preparing a T2 Mac for Linux, consult the [t2linux Preinstall guide](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/preinstall/).

## Installation Process

<Steps>

1.  **Boot from CachyOS USB:**
    *   Restart your Mac and hold the `Option (⌥)` key immediately after powering on.
    *   Select the CachyOS USB drive (usually labeled as "EFI Boot").
2.  **(Optional) Enable Wi-Fi in the Live Environment:**
    *   If you need Wi-Fi during installation and don't have Ethernet/tethering, open the terminal once the CachyOS live environment loads.

>     *   Run these commands to copy the firmware from the EFI partition (prepared in Step 1.3) and configure the network manager:

Reviewer: configure NetworkManager 

(yes no space here)

        ```
    *   You should now be able to connect to Wi-Fi networks using the network applet in the system tray.
3.  **Run the CachyOS Installer:**
    *   Launch the CachyOS installer from the desktop or application menu.
    *   Follow the standard installation procedure, referring to the [Installation on Root](/installation/installation_on_root) guide.
    *   When partitioning, select the free space created earlier. Let the installer handle formatting.
        :::caution[Partitioning Caution]
        Be **very careful** during the partitioning step in the installer. Ensure you are selecting the correct free space you prepared and **do not** accidentally delete or format your existing macOS partition, especially if you intend to dual-boot. Double-check your selections before proceeding.
        :::
    *   CachyOS Hardware Detection ([CHWD](/features/chwd)) should automatically apply necessary T2-specific boot parameters and configurations during installation.

</Steps>

## Post-Installation Steps

After the installation is complete and you have rebooted into your new CachyOS system:

<Steps>

1.  **Install Wi-Fi Firmware Permanently:**

>     *   The Wi-Fi firmware needs to be properly installed on your system. Connect to the internet (Ethernet, USB tethering, or repeat Step 2.2 if necessary).

Reviewer: I think this is better;

If you have followed Step 2.2 to get firmware in the live ISO, you can simply follow it again. Otherwise connect to the internet (Ethernet.....) and follow the steps below:

:::caution[Potential Risks]
Completely removing macOS carries risks, like data loss or rendering the device unusable. It's **strongly recommended** to keep a macOS partition for firmware updates and recovery. Refer to the [T2 Linux Roadmap](https://wiki.t2linux.org/roadmap/#can-i-completely-remove-macos) for details.

If you still decide to remove macOS, ensure you have a full backup and create a [bootable macOS installer](https://support.apple.com/en-us/101578) beforehand.
:::

## Pre-Installation

Creating a bootable macOS installer is optional but recommended if you plan to modify partitions or remove macOS. It can be useful for firmware updates, troubleshooting, or system restoration. For detailed instructions, refer to [Apple's guide](https://support.apple.com/en-us/101578).

Perform these steps below within macOS **before** booting the CachyOS installer.

### Prepare CachyOS Bootable USB

Download the [CachyOS ISO](/cachyos_basic/download) and follow the instructions in [Creating a Bootable CachyOS USB Drive](/installation/installation_prepare#creating-a-bootable-cachyos-usb-drive) to create the installation media.

> #### (Optional) Extract Wi-Fi Firmware

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### (Optional) Extract Wi-Fi Firmware
```

Author: I added next level header to hide it from the right table of content menu. It's okay to show it there?

Reviewer 2: Yes, in fact it should show there.

Author: I guess I should make other sections have sub sections, so all of them look similar in the right sidebar?

Author: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7a505770-bcec-4bcb-8108-67f7bab13c1c)

Reviewer 2: For post-install yeah, i think whatever is in installation process is fine as-is.

:::

:::note[Creating a macOS Recovery Installer]
Creating a bootable macOS installer is optional but recommended if you plan to modify partitions or remove macOS. It can be useful for firmware updates, troubleshooting, or system restoration. For detailed instructions, refer to [Apple's guide](https://support.apple.com/en-us/101578).
:::

## Pre-Installation

Perform these steps within macOS **before** booting the CachyOS installer.

### Prepare CachyOS Bootable USB

Download the [CachyOS ISO](/cachyos_basic/download) and follow the instructions in [Creating a Bootable CachyOS USB Drive](/installation/installation_prepare#creating-a-bootable-cachyos-usb-drive) to create the installation media.

#### (Optional) Extract Wi-Fi Firmware

While still in macOS, open Terminal and run the following command. This copies the necessary Wi-Fi firmware files to your EFI partition, making them accessible later during the CachyOS installation.
```sh
curl -sL https://wiki.t2linux.org/tools/firmware.sh | bash -s copy_to_efi
```

### Prepare Your Disk

If you plan to dual-boot (recommended), use macOS Disk Utility to resize your existing macOS partition and create free space for CachyOS:

> <Steps>

Reviewer: I think the wording of the partition steps can be improved, which also makes me realise the same needs to be done on T2linux wiki.

Author: How about now?

9. If you want separate partitions for `/home`, `/boot` etc., create them as well (if you are a beginner and you don't understand this point, you may just skip it).

</Steps>

### Disable Secure Boot

<Steps>

1. Reboot your Mac and hold `Command (⌘) + R` immediately after powering on to enter Recovery Mode.
2. Go to Utilities > Startup Security Utility.
3. Select "No Security" under **Secure Boot** and "Allow booting from external or removable media" under **Allowed Boot Media**.

</Steps>

Refer to [Apple's guide on Startup Security Utility](https://support.apple.com/en-in/102522) for more details.

---

For an additional overview of preparing a T2 Mac for Linux, consult the [t2linux Preinstall guide](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/preinstall/).

## Installation Process

<Steps>

1.  **Boot from CachyOS USB:**
    *   Restart your Mac and hold the `Option (⌥)` key immediately after powering on.
    *   Select the CachyOS USB drive (usually labeled as "EFI Boot").
2.  **(Optional) Enable Wi-Fi in the Live Environment:**
    *   If you need Wi-Fi during installation and don't have Ethernet/tethering, open the terminal once the CachyOS live environment loads.

>     *   Run these commands to copy the firmware from the EFI partition (prepared in Step 1.3) and configure the NetworkManager:

Reviewer: Step 1.3 no longer exists.

description: How to install CachyOS on a T2 MacBook
---

import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> CachyOS provides out-of-the-box support for T2 MacBooks, including necessary kernel patches in all provided kernels. However, there are crucial steps required before, during, and after installation for a successful setup, especially regarding Wi-Fi.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CachyOS provides out-of-the-box support for T2 MacBooks, including necessary kernel patches in all provided kernels. However, there are crucial steps required to ensure a successful setup.
```
Don't need to be overly verbose here, the sub-headings provide plenty of information.

Completely removing macOS carries risks, like data loss or rendering the device unusable. It's **strongly recommended** to keep a macOS partition for firmware updates and recovery. Refer to the [T2 Linux Roadmap](https://wiki.t2linux.org/roadmap/#can-i-completely-remove-macos) for details.

If you still decide to remove macOS, ensure you have a full backup and create a [bootable macOS installer](https://support.apple.com/en-us/101578) beforehand.
:::

:::note[Wi-Fi Firmware Required]
Wi-Fi **will not work** out of the box during or after installation because the required firmware is proprietary and cannot be redistributed by CachyOS. You will need an internet connection (e.g., Ethernet, USB tethering) for the installation process unless you follow the steps below to prepare the Wi-Fi firmware beforehand and enable it during installation.
:::

:::note[Creating a macOS Recovery Installer]
Creating a bootable macOS installer is optional but recommended if you plan to modify partitions or remove macOS. It can be useful for firmware updates, troubleshooting, or system restoration. For detailed instructions, refer to [Apple's guide](https://support.apple.com/en-us/101578).

> :::

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/adcfd713-48be-4042-a2dd-84f5f7763418)

This looks horrible. I suggest keeping the caution call-out, while moving the other notes someplace else.

Try adding `Internet Connection` under Pre-install, where you mention all the caveats (need firmware, how to get firmware, or use LAN if no firmware) <- should be the first to follow the previous order. This also gets rid off the optional section its merged now.

I also think that the recovery installer should just be merged to the text in `Pre-install`.

```sh
curl -sL https://wiki.t2linux.org/tools/firmware.sh | bash -s copy_to_efi
```

### Prepare Your Disk

If you plan to dual-boot with macOS (recommended), you need to create space for CachyOS. Use the Disk Utility application in macOS to resize your existing macOS partition:

<Steps>

1.  Open **Disk Utility**.
2.  In the Disk Utility sidebar, select the **volume** you want to resize (usually named "Macintosh HD" or similar).
3.  Click the **"Partition"** button in the toolbar.
4.  Click the **"+" (plus)** button below the pie chart representing your disk usage.
5.  **Crucially**, when prompted, choose **"Add Partition"**, *not* "Add Volume". You need to create a separate partition for Linux.
6.  **Name:** Enter a descriptive name for the new partition (e.g., "CachyOS" or "Linux").
7.  **Format:** Select any available format (like APFS or Mac OS Extended). The CachyOS installer will reformat this partition later, so the initial choice doesn't matter.
8.  **Size:** Allocate the desired amount of storage space for CachyOS. **Be aware that resizing partitions later can be difficult or impossible**, so choose a size that meets your needs.

> 9.  *(Optional)* If you are an advanced user and want separate partitions for `/home`, `/boot`, etc., you can create additional partitions now. Beginners can safely skip this and use a single partition for CachyOS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Just remove this, advanced users would already know what they want.

## Installation Process

<Steps>

1.  **Boot from CachyOS USB:**
    *   Restart your Mac and hold the `Option (⌥)` key immediately after powering on.
    *   Select the CachyOS USB drive (usually labeled as "EFI Boot").
2.  **(Optional) Enable Wi-Fi in the Live Environment:**
    *   If you need Wi-Fi during installation and don't have Ethernet/tethering, open the terminal once the CachyOS live environment loads.
    *   Run these commands to copy the firmware from the EFI partition (created in [Extract Wi-Fi Firmware](#pre-installation)) and configure the NetworkManager:
        ```sh
        # Mount the EFI partition (usually nvme0n1p1 on T2 Macs)
        sudo mkdir -p /tmp/apple-wifi-efi
        sudo mount /dev/nvme0n1p1 /tmp/apple-wifi-efi

        # Copy firmware from EFI to the live environment
        bash /tmp/apple-wifi-efi/firmware.sh get_from_efi
        sudo umount /tmp/apple-wifi-efi

        # Configure NetworkManager to use iwd backend
        cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/NetworkManager/conf.d/wifi_backend.conf
        [device]
        wifi.backend=iwd
        EOF
        sudo systemctl restart NetworkManager
        ```

>     *   You should now be able to connect to Wi-Fi networks using the network applet in the system tray.

Reviewer 2: Since this is not a mandatory (and also not crucial), let's just remove this too to not bloat the page and not overload the reader of information.

Author: I wonder now. Should this be removed? Since you need internet connection to install CachyOS. @1Naim

Reviewer: It should be kept imo

Reviewer 2: Yeah brainfart.. I had thought that the kernel cmdline was in the ISOs but I guess not. We can keep this then, sorry.

Author: Okay, I hope I reverted as it was :smile:

### Prepare Your Disk

If you plan to dual-boot with macOS (recommended), you need to create space for CachyOS. Use the Disk Utility application in macOS to resize your existing macOS partition:

<Steps>

> 1.  Open **Disk Utility** (you can find it using Spotlight search: `Cmd + Space`, then type "Disk Utility").

Reviewer: The spotlight search thing is unnecessary.

## Post-Installation Steps

After the installation is complete and you have rebooted into your new CachyOS system, you may need to perform a few additional steps to ensure everything works smoothly.

### Install Wi-Fi Firmware Permanently

>     *   If you have followed the optional [Enable Wi-Fi in the Live Environment](#installation-process) step to get firmware in the live ISO, you can simply follow it again to enable Wi-Fi. Otherwise connect to the internet (e.g., Ethernet, USB tethering) and follow the steps below:

Reviewer 2: You can use steps here or just remove the bullet points.

Author: Good one, thanks!

        sudo modprobe brcmfmac
        ```
    *   Wi-Fi should now work reliably after reboots. You can remove the downloaded `.pkg.tar.zst` file.

###  Further Configuration

>     *   For configuring other hardware components like audio, webcam, Touch Bar, etc., refer to the various guides on the [t2linux Wiki](https://wiki.t2linux.org/roadmap/#configuring-the-installation).

Reviewer 2: Remove bullet point plz
